1. Basics of Linux
What is Linux?
Linux is an open-source, Unix-like operating system based on the Linux kernel. It powers servers, desktops, mobile devices (Android), and embedded systems. Popular distributions include Ubuntu, Fedora, and CentOS.

The Linux Kernel and its Role:
The kernel is the core of the Linux operating system, managing hardware, memory, processes, and system calls.

Linux File System Hierarchy:

/ - Root directory, the starting point of the Linux file system.
/home - Contains user home directories.
/etc - System configuration files.
/var - Variable files like logs, caches, and spool files.
/usr - User programs and libraries.
Absolute vs. Relative Paths:

Absolute path: Specifies the complete path from the root directory, e.g., /home/user/documents.
Relative path: Specifies the path relative to the current directory, e.g., ./documents.
2. Linux Commands
File and Directory Management
ls: Lists files and directories.
pwd: Displays the current directory path.
cd: Changes the directory.
mkdir: Creates a new directory.
rmdir: Deletes an empty directory.
touch: Creates an empty file or updates a file's timestamp.
cp: Copies files and directories.
mv: Moves or renames files and directories.
rm: Deletes files and directories.
ls -a: Lists all files, including hidden ones (those starting with .).
File Content Management
cat: Displays the content of a file.
less/more: Paginate through file content.
head/tail: Display the beginning or end of a file.
grep: Searches for a pattern in files.
find: Searches files and directories based on criteria.
Permissions
chmod: Changes file permissions.
Example: chmod 755 file gives read, write, execute permissions to the owner and read, execute permissions to others.
chown: Changes file ownership.
chgrp: Changes the group ownership of a file.
Archiving and Compression
tar: Archives files into a tarball (.tar).
zip/unzip: Compresses and extracts .zip files.
gzip/gunzip: Compresses and extracts .gz files.
Package Management
Debian-based:
apt: Installs packages (e.g., apt install package_name).
Red Hat-based:
yum/dnf: Installs packages for Red Hat-based distributions.
3. Processes and Services
ps: Lists running processes.
top: Displays active processes and their resource usage.
kill: Terminates a process by PID.
jobs: Lists background processes.
systemctl: Manages services (start, stop, restart services).
4. Shell and Scripting
Shell types: Bash, Zsh, etc.

Shell scripting basics:

Start a script: #!/bin/bash
Variables: x=10
Loops:
bash
Copy code
for i in {1..5}; do
  echo $i
done
Running scripts: sh script.sh or ./script.sh.
Command-line utilities:

awk: Pattern scanning and processing.
sed: Stream editor for text manipulation.
5. Networking
ifconfig: Configures network interfaces.
ping: Tests connectivity to a host.
netstat: Displays network connections and statistics.
scp: Securely copies files between systems.
wget/curl: Downloads files from the web.
6. User and Group Management
useradd: Adds a new user.
passwd: Changes a user’s password.
su: Switches to another user.
sudo: Executes commands with superuser privileges.
Key files:
/etc/passwd: Stores user information.
/etc/shadow: Stores encrypted passwords.
7. Disk and Storage Management
df: Displays disk usage of file systems.
du: Displays disk usage of files and directories.
fdisk: Manages disk partitions.
mount/umount: Attaches/detaches file systems.
fsck: Checks and repairs file systems.
8. System Monitoring and Performance
dmesg: Displays kernel messages.
journalctl: Views logs managed by systemd.
uptime: Shows system uptime.
free: Displays memory usage.
9. Security
iptables: Configures firewall rules.
ssh: Securely connects to remote servers.
scp: Securely copies files between machines.
10. Linux Boot Process
BIOS/UEFI Initialization: Initializes hardware.
Bootloader (GRUB): Loads the kernel.
Kernel Initialization: Loads drivers and starts processes.
Init/Systemd: Initializes user space and starts services.
